Thank you. Again, welcome and thank you for practicing. Thanks for coming together. It's
great we can just support each other with our practice. We have some of our local Sangha
here at Padma Samye Ling, and then also I know beyond this little black marble in front
of me are at least, what, 20 or so people. So glad we're all here together, even though
some of you are invisible, to me at least. But welcome. And again, it's just so special
with everything going on in our own lives and in the world to really have this opportunity
to sit individually and together and contemplate these amazing, beautiful, profound, accessible,
practical teachings that we have right in our hands and hearts. We've been so blessed
to receive teachings and to practice and to continue, so just acknowledge that. And then
along with that, as always, with every single time we do any activity, especially study,
contemplation, practice, really reflecting on the three motivations, which are the three
essential motivations of all the exquisite great perfection of the nine yanas we hold.
So again, just we'll take a few moments, just really connecting with our joy and our appreciation,
our renunciation thoughts of just like how precious this time is. We're free of so many
situations and in inner and outer endowed with so many fortunate circumstances and proclivities.
So just taking that and then, of course, expanding our bodhicitta far and wide. The mind in the
teachings is empty, vast, open. So always expanding, expanding, expanding our imagination,
opening our minds and our hearts and really acknowledging and wishing firmly that our
time here together can really be of profound benefit to limitless beings. And then the
third motivation, connecting with our pure perception, our devotion, you know, as to
whatever degree we can connecting with the purity of the three vajras, the purity of
all forms as enlightened, all sound and movement as enlightened speech, all thought and mind,
just the great enlightened dharmakaya space. And if anything, again, just wrapping it all
up, how perfect this moment is. The perfect opportunity to wake up.
That said, the Buddha said, Guru Rinpoche said, all the great masters and one voice all remind
us and say, "There's not a single Buddha or bodhisattva that didn't have a teacher."
And we all know today we're going to just begin to touch, you know, with just overview
of the guru yoga section of our nundra practice. And as we all know, the guru is so essential
on every single level of the teachings, and especially in the Vajrayana, because we're
again moving beyond our limited rigid fixed perspective and habitual patterns, having
the support and guidance of someone with more knowledge, more wisdom, more realization is
such a gift and so essential. And so that's what we'll do, you know. It helps often, you
know, to think about the word meaning of things. So I know guru yoga, and I think everyone
knows, but again, reflecting on this guru and yoga, both Sanskrit words. And do you know
the kind of the word meaning of guru and yoga? Again, it's profound words. I think the simplest
meanings of those words on the word meaning level is guru is like heavy, rich, saturated,
like you know, really high, revered. So this is a sense, the guru as the teacher, not just
a simple teacher, but heavy with blessings, you know, kind of like I know, Kenshin Pauldin
and Ken Poseong said like heavy like a wish fulfilling tree just laden with fruits and
so heavy, the bows are are are like bowing down, you know, heavy, saturated, full of
blessings, full of realization, full of power, or like a, you know, huge, you know, rain
clouds, you know, just about to burst with blessings, really, bringing upon our own realizations.
So that's a sense of guru simple, you know, heavy, rich, high one, and yoga is very similar
to like our word yoke. So yoga, I think, right is to yoke or to union, you know, to unite.
So uniting with the heavy ones. And then in Tibetan, when the great realized translators
were translating Buddhist vocabulary into Tibetan, then they made the word for guru
or teacher, a llama, we've all heard. And then yoga is naljor. So guru yoga, lama naljor.
And so lama is very similar. And then that it's also made lama, it's like, there's nothing
higher. No higher realization. No better blessings. You know, unsurpassable, just blessings
realization,
your activity, nothing outside of it, nothing beyond it. And then the naljor is, again,
very special too, because again, it, it's skillful. What it means, naljor, I think now
is like the original or authentic. And jor is like to discover or to possess. So it's
discovering or possessing what's authentic, and kind of original, what's primordial. So
again, that's just getting back to this really core view and teaching in our practice of
we're becoming with our practice in all the Buddhist teachings, more familiar with our,
with the innate nature as it is. It's not that we're bringing separate things together,
you know, or just like in, in this, the Supreme symbols of like the bell and Dorje, you know,
they're not in reality, there's the meaning, these aren't separate. It's the union of all
appearances and emptiness, the union of the absolute and relative truth, the union of
wisdom and compassion, they're inseparable aspects, just like the three kayas are inseparable.
They're not three different places. They're different aspects of the nature for our we
conceptually conceptual beings, you know, the Buddha's giving us these maps and tools
to move beyond conception to be in union with our authentic nature. And again, that's the
only difference in the teachings. And which means in reality, our teachers, the Buddha's
Guru Padmasambhava, have realized the true nature and our incomplete unity with the true
nature and complete, they are the Dharma. They are the Buddha, they are the Dharma,
they are the Sangha. And we, at least myself, haven't recognized that nature, maybe have
a glimmer, but we're discovering and we have this great opportunity. So that can just be
really helpful in understanding because again, the Guru, the teacher, the Lama, in the highest
truest sense is appearing to help us discover our own Buddha nature, our own absolute bodhicitta,
to remove our obscurations and habitual patterns and let go of samsara and its causes and connect
with the path of realizing, removing our obscurations and bringing out our innate wisdom, right?
So the Lama embodies all the Buddhas, the Lama, when we take refuge in the very beginning,
we take refuge in the Lama embodiment of the Buddha, all the Buddhas. And when we take
refuge in the Three Jewels, the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, we all know, ultimately, we were taking
real refuge in the Buddha, the realization of the Buddha. Because from that realization,
the compassion of the Dharma comes. And connecting with it are those who have realized it and honor
it and practice it, all of our experiences and opportunities to awaken. And then we also know,
on the Vajrayana level, another aspect of the Three Jewels, the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, what's
called the Lama, Yidam and Dakini or Khandro. So the Lama or the Guru is said, right, is the source
of all blessings, that supreme realization. The source of all blessings is the Lama. But then
also inseparable from that, the Lama, Guru and Pashe is the embodiment of all the Buddhas,
all the deities, all the Yiddams, which is the realization of all the Dharma. The source of all
realization is the Yiddam. The source of all enlightened activity happening so many ways to
create more peace, to create more vitality, to kind of captivate our good, our goodness qualities,
and to overwhelm our negative limited perceptions. All that is the work of the Dakinis and the Dak
as
and Dharmapalas with the source of all enlightened activities who are inseparable from the Lama. So
it's all coming back to the Lama. And then even with our nundra practice itself, we can see right,
even with the four boundless, the very first line, where Lama, infallible protector, please be
aware
of me, calling to our mind, the presence of the Buddha, the presence of the Guru. And here in this
case, we're always practicing on Guru Padmasambhava throughout our practice. And in a nutshell, I
mean
Guru Padmasambhava is so profound, a living Buddha of this time, of this degenerate age, known as
the
second Buddha, was prophesied by Buddha Shakyamuni to come and even glorify the teachings even more
,
and brought especially the higher teachings of the Vajrayana to this world, and especially to Tibet
.
So within our tradition, Guru Padmasambhava is also so prime in that it's truly like the root
teacher of all Tibetan Buddhism, you know, one of the prime forces that actually helped clear away
the obstacles and set the seeds and bring such beautiful conditions along to bring the Dharma
to Tibet, and therefore to us now. And then throughout Tibet and throughout the world, so
many practitioners have appeared of high capability, who are emanations of Padmasambhava. So many
practitioners have had their own direct experiences with Padmasambhava. So the teacher is so
profound,
and again, brings us beyond conception to more direct perception of our authentic nature.
So again, I don't want to spend too much time talking today, so just kind of remembering some
of that basics, and then thought to go over the actual visualization we're doing and kind of look
at that section of the Nundro. So when we look at the the Nundro practice in general, right, all of
our practice, we're always beginning with thinking of Guru Padmasambhava as embodiment of all the
Buddhas of the three times, as inseparable from our own teacher. And again, just to remember, it
said,
our own teacher in this life is more kind than all the Buddhas. They're actually in our life,
before our eyes, in our perception, knowing us as we are now, helping, you know, helping us see
more
clearly, bringing out our own goodness qualities, bestowing so many teachings and blessings.
Bringing the teacher to our mind and heart, really, we should be, it's so powerful and beneficial
to
do all the time, again, because it's like a beautiful sun bringing out our own naturalness.
So we always begin our practice thinking of the Buddhas and thinking of all the lineage masters,
and then often, too, calling the Lama from afar, like we usually recite this beautiful calling the
Lama from afar prayer by Dudram Rinpoche, but even just the seven line prayer itself is calling the
Lama from afar. Or there's so there's many other prayers too, but really feeling that living
presence
of the Lama of Guru Padmasambhava, inseparable from our own teacher in this life, is vital and good
.
And just like the true words of the Buddha and Padmasambhava, anyone who thinks of me and calls
upon me, that moment I'm there, the Buddhas are not limited. So we're really being real here with
our practice. And then we go through and like I already quickly mentioned, in the four thoughts
that turn the mind just in general, they just help us recognize our position and our place and kind
of reflect on some of the facts of life, which often we're kind of ignoring or kind of having
expectations contrary to them. But we begin thinking of the Lama, infallible protector, please be
aware
of me. And like we've mentioned before, and it's worth mentioning again, this isn't just outer Lama
,
maybe Kim Po Se Wong Rinpoche is also pointed out many times. This is also, of course, think
feeling
the presence of the outer Lama, the absolute Lama. But then our own Lama is what we're also
needing. And so this is also reigniting our own mindfulness, alertness, conscientiousness.
That's what is our own Lama that we can, that we really need, no matter what anyone else can
guide us to do, having our mindfulness, our alertness, our conscientiousness on and off the cushion
with the outer nundra of the four thoughts or the inner nundra of the main nundra sections.
Keeping that mindfulness, alertness, conscientiousness with us gracefully, gently, but present
is the three great supports like Kim Po calls, and then going through thinking of these. And then,
of course, with refuge, we're taking refuge in the Lama embodiment of the three jewels,
the three roots from now until we are completely awakened, all our obscurations are removed,
and then we settle at the end of the session, take the ultimate. Again, it's in a way another guru
yoga, just relax, mingle our own mind with Guru Padmasambhava, relax in awareness.
And then again, reappearing before us is who? Guru Padmasambhava and all the objects of refuge,
being witness to our bodhicitta commitment. And then we're making the mandala offering to the
Lama, offering all of our experiences to the three jewels, bringing out our wisdom, which is so
fundamental, and generating positive merit through great generosity and openness, and then removing
our obscurations like we talked about a couple of weeks ago, who's there, our Guru Padmasambhava,
our own teacher, inseparable from Vajrasattva, witnessing all of our downfalls and mistakes
along with us, and purifying, cleansing, awakening. And then we get to our main section of the Guru
Yoga, the swiftly penetrating blessings of the Guru Yoga. So we'll just kind of quickly go over
this. And we've done this many times, but these lines are here, right? "Once self is Vajrayogini,
and in the sky in front, the root teacher manifests in the form of Padmasambhava."
So here, again, from the very start, we're really dropping our mundane samsara conceptions.
We're really, again, expanding our minds. And then here we have these skillful means
of the visualization, which, again, is using concepts to move beyond concepts.
And so here we're not just in our ordinary, regular form, but we're actually feeling
ourselves and visualizing ourselves as Vajrayogini. Yeshisoja, who's the perfect student,
Vajrayogini, mother of all the Buddhas, Prajnaparamita, the universal mother,
Yeshisoja, the delightful, passionate consort of Padmasambhava.
And then we're not just in our ordinary body. We're in an extraordinary place.
The whole universe is transformed into the pure land. Everything is shining with wisdom light,
reverberating with meaning and peace and grace and beauty.
Uncontrived, but just knowing this is a pure land and ourselves as Vajrayogini. It's Yeshisoja.
And so there's a few different visualizations. And the Duddham Rinpoche's visualization,
I think we know to just kind of review, we're standing where we are Yeshisoja, Vajrayogini.
We have two arms, two legs, one face. We have a female form.
Our body is ruby red. And again, all of this is not substantial. This is
transcendental wisdom rainbow body. All is vivid, yet empty.
That's how it is. But that's we're kind of just being aware of this. This is actually
I am Yeshisoja. Two arms, two legs, ruby red. I'm standing with my right foot slightly forward,
ready to act and benefit others on a sun and moon disk, crushing the corpse of this of mundane ego
clinging and negative emotions and grasping. Majestic in our form is we are, you know, in the
form of a 16 year old in the teachings, like very, just very prime of youth and voluptuous,
youthful,
we're semi wrathful. Sometimes the Buddha's are appearing very peaceful,
sometimes very wrathful, then they're semi wrathful. So we're both.
We have beautiful black golden plated hair, we're standing naked with bone ornaments.
And silks and jewels and tinkling bells blowing in the in the graceful winds.
You know, we're holding in our left hand, we're holding a skull cup, just brimming with ambrosia
and and rakta. And then in our right hand, we're holding a copper colored curved knife
with a vajra that's handle is a vajra, you know, up.
And, you know, we have a third eye. And then, of course, we always we're on the inner level, too.
We're recognizing the pure view of, right, all of all of the elements that make up our body
are the five, the five wisdom mothers
who are in inseparable union with the five male Buddhas, the five aggregates.
And then just like every month during our dakini practice, when we do the the Yumka Dechanjalmo,
I mean, we all whoever has done that, right, to some degree, it's very detailed with what we can
do as we're visualizing ourselves as Vajrayogini here. But those are maybe the point. And then
before us, feeling the presence seeing Guru Padmasambhava, feeling his presence again,
just in transcendental wisdom, rainbow body, splendid, emanating, just all kinds of wisdom
lights clearly in the sky, majestic, so present, full of bliss and blessings, love, and just
supreme
seeing and omniscience. You know, he's wearing the three robes on the inner level. He's wearing
the on the outer level, he has the brocade cloak, cloak, and then he's wearing a blue
kind of chuba underneath, and then beneath that, some white undergarments. What is that? That's
representing the perfection of that practicing and holding the three vows of the foundational
Buddhism of Vinaya, Theravadin Buddhism, and Mahayana Buddhism, and Vajrayana Buddhism,
and separately, holding the three vows and separately. And in his left hand, holding the
skull cup with swirling active ambrosia and the long life face, full of vitality.
And then in the right hand, holding, you know, the unshakable awareness of the Vatra.
And with the Katvanga, representing kind of the wisdom consort, and just the realization of the
three kayas, and the profound in meaning. And then also ornamented with other jewels,
wearing the lotus hat, giving to him by, I think, the king of Zohar, after the king kind of out of
great fear, tried to burn Guru Padma Sambhava alive, and then found several days later, Guru Padma
Sambhava just shining, resplendent in a lake that had formed. It really turned the king's mind
towards
the Dharma, and the beauty and the powerful, beautiful example of Guru Padma Sambhava,
after being attacked, just being pure, full of love, gracing the land with pure waters,
untouched by the fire. So the king offered him this hat we often see that has the three peaks,
and I mean, five peaks, like the five wisdoms and the vajra, and then the vulture feather,
which represents kind of like the highest view. So it's, anyway, there's many details to Guru Padma
Sambhava, and full of meaning, and that's also part of our realization. It's like we don't need to
get
fixated on the meaning, but reflecting on some of the way the symbols echo and can bring up
meaning in our heart, and remember the teachings. Again, not just to study, contemplate, but to
bring
some realization of that meaning, because for the Buddhas, everything is meaning, and everything is
empty. That's omniscience, right? So whether we can see all the details of the visualization or not
,
most important, most fundamental, essential is our devotion, is our closeness feeling,
to whatever degree it is, just some interest,
or wanting to know more, or actually beginning to study a little more, beginning to practice more,
having more trust and confidence in the practice until it's completely unshakable and valuable.
What that closeness feeling, that kind of longing, respect, joy, just cherishing, you know, and
trust
is some of the words that can connect with devotion.
That's what's really, like they say in the teachings, devotion opens the door to realization
and blessings, that openness, that kind of where we can both with concepts move beyond concepts,
because we have that deeper trust that's coming out of some degree of experience.
So feeling the presence of Guru Patma Sambhava, inseparable from our own precious teacher,
and all the buddhas of the three times is most important, whether we can do the visualization
or not. So once we have this kind of atmosphere of purity and devotion, then we're in one voice,
making this supplication as Vajrayogini, inseparable from ourselves to Guru Patma Sambhava,
embodiment
of all the buddhas of the three times without exception, most excellent root teacher, I pray
to you. In this and future lives and in the bardo, in these three, hold me with your compassion,
bless me ceaselessly throughout the three times.
So again, with all of our chanting, as much as we can, trying to keep our mindfulness,
our alertness, our conscientiousness, as we're chanting, connecting with our heart and our meaning,
and making this prayer. These are the words of Guru Patma Sambhava actually, so special.
So we recite this part three times, and then I thought to say, often Rinpoche's,
they do give the instruction when we have time and we're doing the Guru Yoga.
After we recite this supplication three times, it's not part of the root text, but if you have
time, it's very powerful, very beneficial to just again increase that connection with the
presence and blessings of Guru Patma Sambhava by reciting the seven-line prayer again,
at least three times, again with joy, with devotion, with bodhicitta,
reciting the seven-line prayer, this profound prayer chanted by, that's self-eminated and
just chanted by hundreds and thousands of practitioners through the ages.
It's inseparable from Guru Patma Sambhava, so rich in meaning, outer, inner, secret, absolute.
It is Patma Sambhava. So if you have time, reciting the seven-line prayer is an instruction from
Kimpo Rinpoche's, if it's possible. Usually by the time we get to there in our Saturday practice,
there isn't, I'm trying to kind of conserve time, so I've omitted it, but definitely if
you have time, do that. And then the main practice, then we'll move to simplifying the practice,
keeping all of the visualization, all of the motivation, feeling the presence even stronger
then, we'll just simplify by reciting the mantra of Guru Patma Sambhava, Omahum Badra Guru Pema
Siddhihum,
and just reciting that. And then of course mantra is so profound, there's no single meaning,
it's profound, I won't go into trying to give any even simple kind of word meanings for the
Vajra Guru mantra right now, but we can, we've all heard them or can look them up too. There's a
beautiful translation of a terma from Yeshisoja on the meaning and the benefits of reciting the
Vajra Guru mantra, which can be found at on Lotzawa house. I think it's called something like that,
the benefits of reciting the Vajra Guru mantra or something like that. So it's profound, but as we
're
reciting, again, these pure words, we're focusing, reciting, letting each syllable be clearly
pronounced
and kind of visualizing the syllables, not too loud, not too soft, letting it reverberate in our
body
and echo in our space. And as we're reciting it, keeping the visualization and as we're doing the
visualization, just seeing and feeling so many wisdom lights of all the vivid, bright rainbow
colors coming from Guru Padmasambhava, along with so many blessings and appearing in so many ways,
there can be, according to the teachings, can be lights are all coming and raining, nectar is
falling and raining through us, every pore, all kinds of, you know, incy little forms of Guru
Padmasambhava and ritual elements can be just blessing, just showers of blessings coming and
filling ourselves and also going to all the beings, just expanding our bodhicitta, bringing
blessings
to all beings and letting our joy and devotion be kind of offering and are just making our
connection with Guru Padmasambhava, the living Buddha who's with us right now is the main point.
And then we can at times too, we're receiving the four empowerments as we're reciting the mantra
as well. So like from Guru Rinpoche's crown, you know, this white vibrant, you know, white light
comes with Om to the Om in our crown and is giving all, you know, body blessings from Ah
is the ruby red of Guru Rinpoche is coming to the Ah in our own throat, bringing all the speech
blessings and the sapphire blue light from the home in Guru Rinpoche's heart is coming to the home
in our heart and filling up that chakra, bringing all the mind blessings. And from all the three
places in the Guru, kind of all blessings are coming, removing all of our obscurations.
So we recite as long as we can, just reflecting, relaxing, feeling the presence
for as much as we have time. And then when we finish, we're kind of going to seal the visualization
.
So the blessings and empowerments of body, speech and mind are completely and perfectly
obtained where we're kind of sealing the little practice session there. And then of course we have
Vajra, Vajra Guru, Kaya, Waka, Sita, Sidi, Hung. So Vajra is of course indestructible Guru, you
know,
and Kaya means we're receiving the body blessings. And then too we you can just simply do this or
sometimes this Mudra is like making like a five-pointed Vajra. But anyway, Kaya,
Waka is a speech blessing, Sita is the mind blessing, and Sidi, Hung is all the blessings
we're receiving. So right from the white Om we're coming, all of our the obscurations
of from the actions of our body are completely purified. And then we've like completely qualified
stirring the seeds of awakening to our own Nirmana Kaya realization and accomplishment.
That's called the vase empowerment. And then from the ah, the red ah, is removing all the
obscurations and negativities we've accumulated to our speech, just completely purifying them,
bringing out our own enlightened speech. And that's actually stirring the seeds of awakening
our some Boga Kaya realization and accomplishment. That's known as the secret empowerment.
And then from the blue, sapphire blue home coming, that's removing all of our mind
obscurations, bringing out our own enlightened mind, awakening and stirring the seeds of our
own Dharmakaya Buddhahood realization. That's called the wisdom empowerment.
And then the fourth empowerment from all three places, all lights are coming to all of our
three main chakras to all of us. And just removing all of our subtle obscurations,
the most subtle, completely bringing out our full Buddhahood. And that's kind of the unity,
inseparable unity of the three Kaya state, which is again that union, the authentic original
state we're completely familiar with and awakened with. It's completely received these blessings.
And then we're going to, again, relax, let go. So then we have the part where we're kind of letting
the visualization dissolve. And there's two ways we can do that. One way is that as Vajrayogini,
we're just like kind of like evaporate up, just right into Gurumpushe's heart.
The other way, maybe that's just from a different perspective, Gurumpushe can kind of dissolve into
a tiny white light imprinted with home or she, like the size of a pea. And that's embodying
everything, you know, so full, vibrant, empty bliss, coming, coming down and being received
right into the top of our central channel, kind of just like coming down through our central
channel,
through our crown chakra, through our speech chakra, coming down and just resting in our
heart of hearts and the depths of our hearts. And then just letting that relax and dissolve.
And then we're just, again, just unite, just relax. Like it says, behold the emptiness awareness,
the true face of the Lama. So resting in Rigpa, resting in our awareness, look to the looker,
start to have more, just be with that. So that's all I'll say for now, for our teachings.
And again, doing the practice, I know we all know it, but maybe we all just have even more
inclination and opportunity to really practice. And of course, studying to some degree is so
important. But practicing what we study, whatever we've heard is so important. And again, the Guru
Yoga is so supreme, because this is so direct, so immediate, and so powerful. Just all of our
teachers are reminding us again and again and again, how powerful it is to do the Guru Yoga and
keep
the presence of Guru Padmasambhava with us, the thoughts of our own precious teacher with us,
inseparable from Guru Pishye. So that's all I'll say for now. Now let's actually do what I'm saying
,
and we'll do the practice. So we'll just take a few moments to
just relax, and then we'll go to our Dhrjum Tursar Nundral practice.
[silence]